---
title: "greylock: A Python Package for Measuring The Composition of Complex Datasets"
collection: publications
category: preprints
permalink: /publication/sentropy
excerpt: 'This paper presents a Python package to compute similarity-sensitive diversity indices, as well as applications.'
date: 2023-12-29
venue: arXiv
#slidesurl: 'https://academicpages.github.io/files/slides2.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.00102'
#citation: 'Your Name, You. (2010). &quot;Paper Title Number 2.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(2).'
---

Machine-learning datasets are typically characterized by measuring their size and class balance. However, there exists a richer and potentially more useful set of measures, termed diversity measures, that incorporate elements' frequencies and between-element similarities. Although these have been available in the R and Julia programming languages for other applications, they have not been as readily available in Python, which is widely used for machine learning, and are not easily applied to machine-learning-sized datasets without special coding considerations. To address these issues, we developed greylock, a Python package that calculates diversity measures and is tailored to large datasets. greylock can calculate any of the frequency-sensitive measures of Hill's D-number framework, and going beyond Hill, their similarity-sensitive counterparts (Greylock is a mountain). greylock also outputs measures that compare datasets (beta diversities). We first briefly review the D-number framework, illustrating how it incorporates elements' frequencies and between-element similarities. We then describe greylock's key features and usage. We end with several examples - immunomics, metagenomics, computational pathology, and medical imaging - illustrating greylock's applicability across a range of dataset types and fields.
